Add blog posts about WebAssembly in Cloud Native (#43760)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-12-07-a-demo-of-webassembly-and-wasi-on-kubernetes/index.md

The major way to run Wasm modules on Kubernetes is adding Wasm support to the Kubernetes nodes. To achieve this, we can either manually install a container runtime build with the Wasm runtime library or use the Kwasm Operator to automate the process.

_[Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/)_ (Kubernetes in Docker) is a tool for running local Kubernetes clusters using Docker containers as "nodes". To facilitate the experiments, use kind to create Kubernetes cluster in the following sections. Run the following command to install Kind.

```bash
[ $(uname -m) = x86_64 ] && curl -Lo ./kind https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/dl/v0.20.0/kind-linux-amd64
chmod +x ./kind
sudo mv ./kind /usr/local/bin/kind
```

##### Kubernetes + Containerd + Crun

In this section, I will demonstrate the manual installation of crun with the WasmEdge runtime library, and adjust containerd config to use crun as the runtime, enabling Wasm support on the Kubernetes node.

> Create a single-node Kubernetes cluster using kind.

Author: I mentioned here there is only 1 node in the cluster. So we don't need to add node selector here?

Reviewer: You can instead explain that this advice only makes sense in this specific context and won't be generally applicable. Pick whichever you like of those 2 options (or suggest another). The aim is to make sure that readers don't infer something unhelpful.

Author: Ok. I add nodeSelector for the pod: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/4d7edac253c031fbff397678d467cbd64d7e562d

---
layout: blog
title: "A demo of WebAssembly and WASI on Kubernetes"
date: 2023-11-11
slug: a-demo-of-webassembly-and-wasi-on-kubernetes
---

**Author:** Seven Cheng (SAP)

> _[WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/)_ (Wasm) was originally created for the browser, and it has become increasingly popular on the server-side as well. WebAssembly is gaining popularity in the Cloud Native ecosystem due to its advantages over containers, including smaller size, faster speed, enhanced security, and greater portability. 

Author: Updated: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/commit/1c7e53b2bd14cde40ce7b89e0b8725be9cd27ff8

_Rustc_ is a cross-platform compiler with many compilation targets, including wasm32-wasi. This target compiles Rust code into Wasm modules that follow the WASI standard. Compiling Rust code to the wasm32-wasi target allows Rust's functionality and safety to be integrated into the WebAssembly environment while leveraging standardized system interfaces provided by wasm32-wasi for interaction with the host system.

Add the `wasm32-wasi` target to the Rust compiler.

```bash
rustup target add wasm32-wasi
```

### Write a Rust Program

Create a new Rust project using `cargo new` command.

```bash
cargo new http-server
```

Edit the `Cargo.toml` file to add the dependencies listed below. _[warp_wasi](https://crates.io/crates/warp_wasi)_ is specifically designed for WASI and is built upon the _[Warp](https://docs.rs/warp/latest/warp/)_ framework, which is a lightweight web server framework used to develop high-performance asynchronous web applications.

> ```bash

Author: Remove the syntax marker: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/d4ee5b15713b53f4baa41c365d2a36d6533f4aa3

[dependencies]
tokio_wasi = { version = "1", features = ["rt", "macros", "net", "time", "io-util"]}
warp_wasi = "0.3"
```

Create a simple HTTP server that exposes services on port 8080 and returns "Hello, World!" when a request is received.

```rust
use warp::Filter;

#[tokio::main(flavor = "current_thread")]
async fn main() {
    let hello = warp::get()
        .and(warp::path::end())
        .map(|| "Hello, World!");

    println!("Listening on http://0.0.0.0:8080");
    warp::serve(hello).run(([0, 0, 0, 0], 8080)).await;
}
```

Compile the program into a Wasm module, it will be written to the `target/wasm32-wasi/release` directory of project.

```bash
cargo build --target wasm32-wasi --release
```

### Install WasmEdge

The compiled Wasm module requires an appropriate Wasm runtime for execution. Popular choices for this include WasmEdge, Wasmtime, and Wasmer, etc.

In this article, I use _[WasmEdge](https://wasmedge.org/docs/)_, a lightweight, high-performance, and extensible WebAssembly runtime. 

> Install WasmEdge.

Author: Change it to `Install WasmEdge by running:`. 
The header `### Install WasmEdge` already exists: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/blob/b2ecd7fbe57fd9d5398244c899faeb4f69ace7fd/content/en/blog/_posts/2023-12-07-a-demo-of-webassembly-and-wasi-on-kubernetes/index.md?plain=1#L101-L107

```bash
# Running scripts directly via curl | bash has security implications.  
# Carefully examine the script content and only execute if you completely understand and trust the source.
curl -sSf https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WasmEdge/WasmEdge/master/utils/install.sh | bash
```

Make the installed binary available in the current session.

```bash
source $HOME/.wasmedge/env
```

### Run the Wasm Module

You can use the `wasmedge` command to run the Wasm module. 

```bash
wasmedge target/wasm32-wasi/release/http-server.wasm
```

Send a request to the service.

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080
```

The output is:

```bash
Hello, World!
```

> ## Run Wasm Modules in the Container Ecosystem
> 
> ### Run Wasm Modules in Linux Container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run Wasm modules using container tooling

### Run Wasm modules in a local Linux container, manually
```

An easy way to run Wasm modules in the container ecosystem is to embed the Wasm bytecode file in a Linux container image. Precisely, you can trim down the Linux OS inside the container to the point where it is just enough to support the Wasm runtime. Since Wasm modules are housed in standard containers, they can be integrated seamlessly with any existing container ecosystem.

Compared to a regular Linux OS, the attack surface of the slimmed Linux OS is dramatically reduced. Nonetheless, this approach still necessitates the launching of a Linux container. Although the Linux OS is trimmed down, it still takes up 80% of the container's image size.

Build a Linux container image using the compiled Wasm module. Create a Dockerfile named `Dockerfile-wasmedge-slim` in the root directory of the `http-server` project. In the Dockerfile, include the Wasm module in a slim Linux image with wasmedge installed, and execute the Wasm module using the `wasmedge` command.

```yaml
FROM wasmedge/slim-runtime:0.10.1
COPY target/wasm32-wasi/release/http-server.wasm /
CMD ["wasmedge", "--dir", ".:/", "/http-server.wasm"]
```

> Build the container image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build the container image:
```

{{< figure src="02-high-level-and-low-level-container-runtimes.svg" alt="The diagram illustrates high-level runtimes like containerd and CRI-O receiving API requests from container management platforms like Kubernetes and Docker, and calling low-level runtimes conforming to OCI specification such as crun and youki, which directly manage containers." caption="Figure 2: High-level and low-level container runtimes" >}}

Before running a Wasm module, build it into an image without a Linux OS. _scratch_ is the most minimal base image reserved in Docker. The Dockerfile looks like this:

```bash
FROM scratch
COPY target/wasm32-wasi/release/http-server.wasm /
CMD ["/http-server.wasm"]
```

Build the container image. The image created this time is approximately only 1/4 the size of the previously built `wasm-demo-app:slim` image.

```bash
docker build -t docker.io/cr7258/wasm-demo-app:v1 .
```

To make it easier to use in the following demos, push the image to Docker Hub. Replace the repo with your own.

```bash
docker push docker.io/cr7258/wasm-demo-app:v1
```

Next, I will individually demonstrate how to run Wasm modules through both low-level and high-level container runtimes.

> #### Low-level Container Runtime

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
#### Run Wasm modules in a local Linux container, via a low-level runtime
```

_[Crun](https://github.com/containers/crun)_ is a fast and lightweight OCI container runtime written in C, which has built-in support for WasmEdge. In this section, I will demonstrate how to utilize crun to directly launch a Wasm module using the provided config.json and rootfs files, without depending on high-level container runtimes.

{{< note >}}
Ensure that you have installed WasmEdge as instructed in the section: [Install WasmEdge](#install-wasmedge).
{{< /note >}}

Install the necessary dependencies for the compilation.

```shell
apt update
apt install -y make git gcc build-essential pkgconf libtool \
     libsystemd-dev libprotobuf-c-dev libcap-dev libseccomp-dev libyajl-dev \
     go-md2man libtool autoconf python3 automake
```

> Configure, build, and install a crun binary with WasmEdge support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure, build, and install a `crun` binary that includes WasmEdge support:
```
?

```shell
git clone https://github.com/containers/crun
cd crun
./autogen.sh
./configure --with-wasmedge
make
make install
```

Run `crun -v` to check if the installation was successful. 

```bash
crun -v
```

Seeing `+WASM:wasmedge` indicates that WasmEdge has been installed in crun.

> ```bash

Author: Remove the syntax marker: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/d4ee5b15713b53f4baa41c365d2a36d6533f4aa3

			"type": "mqueue",
			"source": "mqueue",
			"options": [
				"nosuid",
				"noexec",
				"nodev"
			]
		},
		{
			"destination": "/sys",
			"type": "sysfs",
			"source": "sysfs",
			"options": [
				"nosuid",
				"noexec",
				"nodev",
				"ro"
			]
		},
		{
			"destination": "/sys/fs/cgroup",
			"type": "cgroup",
			"source": "cgroup",
			"options": [
				"nosuid",
				"noexec",
				"nodev",
				"relatime",
				"ro"
			]
		}
	],
	"annotations": {
		"module.wasm.image/variant": "compat"
	},
	"linux": {
		"resources": {
			"devices": [
				{
					"allow": false,
					"access": "rwm"
				}
			]
		},
		"namespaces": [
			{
				"type": "pid"
			},
			{
				"type": "network",
				"path": "/proc/1/ns/net"
			},
			{
				"type": "ipc"
			},
			{
				"type": "uts"
			},
			{
				"type": "cgroup"
			},
			{
				"type": "mount"
			}
		],
		"maskedPaths": [
			"/proc/acpi",
			"/proc/asound",
			"/proc/kcore",
			"/proc/keys",
			"/proc/latency_stats",
			"/proc/timer_list",
			"/proc/timer_stats",
			"/proc/sched_debug",
			"/sys/firmware",
			"/proc/scsi"
		],
		"readonlyPaths": [
			"/proc/bus",
			"/proc/fs",
			"/proc/irq",
			"/proc/sys",
			"/proc/sysrq-trigger"
		]
	}
}
```

> Start the container using crun. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start the container using `crun`:
```

```shell
crun run wasm-demo-app
```

Send a request to the service.

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080
```

The output is:

```bash
Hello, World!
```

To delete the container, you can execute the following command:

```bash
crun kill wasm-demo-app SIGKILL
```

#### High-level Container Runtime

The _container shim_ serves as a bridge between high and low-level container runtimes. Its main purpose is to abstract low-level runtime details, enabling uniform management of various runtimes in high-level runtime. In this section, I will use _[containerd](https://github.com/containerd/containerd)_ as an example. Containerd is an industry-standard container runtime with an emphasis on simplicity, robustness, and portability. 

Containerd can manage Wasm modules in two ways:

> - 1.Manages Wasm modules through container runtimes like crun and youki that support building with the Wasm runtime library. These two runtimes can also run regular Linux containers. Containerd uses `containerd-shim-runc-v2` to interface with low-level container runtimes.
> - 2.Manages Wasm modules directly through Wasm runtimes, such as WasmEdge, Wasmtime, Spin, and Slight. Containerd uses `containerd-wasm-shim(runwasi)` to interface with Wasm runtimes.

Reviewer: We list products from the ecosystem in either (fair) random order, or alphabetical order.
```suggestion
1. Manages Wasm modules through container runtimes like crun and youki that support building with the Wasm runtime library. These two runtimes can also run regular Linux containers. Containerd uses `containerd-shim-runc-v2` to interface with low-level container runtimes.
1. Manages Wasm modules directly through Wasm runtimes, such as Slight, Spin, WasmEdge, and Wasmtime. Containerd uses `containerd-wasm-shim(runwasi)` to interface with Wasm runtimes.
```

BTW, Hugo can do the counting for us hence both items are numbered as 1.

{{< figure src="03-use-containerd-shim-to-manage-wasm-modules.svg" alt="The diagram illustrates that containerd can manage WebAssembly modules in two ways: through container runtimes that support building with the WebAssembly runtime library via the containerd-shim-runc-v2, or directly through WebAssembly runtimes like WasmEdge and Wasmtime using the containerd-wasm-shim." caption="Figure 3: Use containerd shim to manage Wasm modules" >}}

##### Containerd + Crun

In this section, I will demonstrate how to configure crun as runtime in containerd, enabling support for running Wasm modules.

{{< note >}}

> Ensure that crun binary has been installed as per the instructions in the section: [Low-level Container Runtime](#low-level-container-runtime).

Reviewer: You might need to update the link here if following feedback elsewhere.

Author: Updated the link: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/d4ee5b15713b53f4baa41c365d2a36d6533f4aa3

{{< /note >}}

> Run the following commands to install containerd.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following commands to install containerd:
```

```shell
export VERSION="1.7.3"
sudo apt install -y libseccomp2
sudo apt install -y wget

wget https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/download/v${VERSION}/cri-containerd-cni-${VERSION}-linux-amd64.tar.gz
wget https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/download/v${VERSION}/cri-containerd-cni-${VERSION}-linux-amd64.tar.gz.sha256sum

> sha256sum --check cri-containerd-cni-${VERSION}-linux-amd64.tar.gz.sha256sum

Reviewer: Extra credit: list the checksum you expect.

Author: Added expected checksum: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/5cc1917d7948ee37904f81f03a4b9df713682c9b

> sudo tar --no-overwrite-dir -C / -xzf cri-containerd-cni-${VERSION}-linux-amd64.tar.gz

Reviewer: This looks dangerous; why deploy to `/`?

Author: The files extracted from the archive are as follows, including containerd binary, cni plugins, config file, etc. it will place the files from `/`, for example: `/usr/local/bin/containerd`.
```
├── cri-containerd.DEPRECATED.txt
├── etc
│   ├── cni
│   │   └── net.d
│   │       └── 10-containerd-net.conflist
│   ├── crictl.yaml
│   └── systemd
│       └── system
│           └── containerd.service
├── opt
│   ├── cni
│   │   └── bin
│   │       ├── bandwidth
│   │       ├── bridge
│   │       ├── dhcp
│   │       ├── dummy
│   │       ├── firewall
│   │       ├── host-device
│   │       ├── host-local
│   │       ├── ipvlan
│   │       ├── loopback
│   │       ├── macvlan
│   │       ├── portmap
│   │       ├── ptp
│   │       ├── sbr
│   │       ├── static
│   │       ├── tuning
│   │       ├── vlan
│   │       └── vrf
│   └── containerd
│       └── cluster
│           ├── gce
│           │   ├── cloud-init
│           │   │   ├── master.yaml
│           │   │   └── node.yaml
│           │   ├── cni.template
│           │   ├── configure.sh
│           │   └── env
│           └── version
└── usr
    └── local
        ├── bin
        │   ├── containerd
        │   ├── containerd-shim
        │   ├── containerd-shim-runc-v1
        │   ├── containerd-shim-runc-v2
        │   ├── containerd-stress
        │   ├── crictl
        │   ├── critest
        │   ├── ctd-decoder
        │   └── ctr
        └── sbin
            └── runc

16 directories, 38 files
```

sudo systemctl daemon-reload

> sudo systemctl start containerd

Reviewer: (nit)
I'd write
```suggestion
sudo systemctl enable containerd --now
```

```

You can run Wasm modules through containerd:
- `--runc-binary`: Specifies to use `crun` as low-level runtime to start the container.

> - `--runtime`: Specifies the version and name of the shim, which are converted by containerd into the binary name of the shim: `io.containerd.runc.v2 -> containerd-shim-runc-v2`. Containerd starts the shim by running `containerd-shim-runc-v2` binary file, which subsequently invokes crun to launch the container.

Reviewer: (nits)
```suggestion
- `--runtime`: Specifies the version and name of the shim, which are converted by containerd into the binary name of the shim. For example: `io.containerd.runc.v2` → `containerd-shim-runc-v2`. Containerd starts the shim by running the `containerd-shim-runc-v2` binary file, which subsequently invokes `crun` to launch the container.
```

In this article, I use WasmEdge containerd shim to run the Wasm modules. 

Clone the runwasi repository.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/containerd/runwasi.git
cd runwasi
```

Install the necessary dependencies for compilation.

```bash
sudo apt-get -y install    \
      pkg-config          \
      libsystemd-dev      \
      libdbus-glib-1-dev  \
      build-essential     \
      libelf-dev          \
      libseccomp-dev      \
      libclang-dev        \
      libssl-dev
```

Build and install the shims.

```
make build
sudo make install
```

Specify `--runtime=io.containerd.wasmedge.v1` to run the Wasm module through WasmEdge shim.

```bash
ctr run --rm --net-host \
--runtime=io.containerd.wasmedge.v1 \
docker.io/cr7258/wasm-demo-app:v1 \
wasm-demo-app
```

Send a request to the service.

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080
```

The output is:

```bash
Hello, World!
```

To delete the container, you can execute the following command.

```bash
ctr task kill wasm-demo-app --signal SIGKILL
```

### Run Wasm modules on Container Management Platforms

#### Run Wasm modules on Docker Desktop

> 

Author: Added: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/d4ee5b15713b53f4baa41c365d2a36d6533f4aa3

Docker Desktop also uses runwasi to support the Wasm module. Follow the instructions in the [Docker Wasm documentation](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/wasm/#turn-on-wasm-workloads) to enable Wasm support on Docker Desktop.

Use the following `docker run` command to start a Wasm container on your system. `--runtime=io.containerd.wasmedge.v1` informs the Docker engine that you want to use the Wasm containerd shim instead of the standard Linux container runtime.

```bash
docker run -d -p 8080:8080 \
--name=wasm-demo-app \
--runtime=io.containerd.wasmedge.v1 \
docker.io/cr7258/wasm-demo-app:v1
```

Send a request to the service.

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080
```

The output is:

```bash
Hello, World!
```

To delete the container, you can execute the following command.

```bash
docker rm -f wasm-demo-app
```

#### Run Wasm modules on Kubernetes

WebAssembly is [driving the third wave of cloud computing](https://nigelpoulton.com/webassembly-the-future-of-cloud-computing/). As the de facto standard in the realm of container orchestration, Kubernetes continuously evolves to leverage the advantages brought about by WebAssembly.

> The major way to run Wasm modules on Kubernetes is adding Wasm support to the Kubernetes nodes. To achieve this, we can either manually install a container runtime build with the Wasm runtime library or use the Kwasm Operator to automate the process.

Author: Use `you` and `built`: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/d4ee5b15713b53f4baa41c365d2a36d6533f4aa3

_[Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/)_ (Kubernetes in Docker) is a tool for running local Kubernetes clusters using Docker containers as "nodes". To facilitate the experiments, use kind to create Kubernetes cluster in the following sections. Run the following command to install Kind.

```bash
[ $(uname -m) = x86_64 ] && curl -Lo ./kind https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/dl/v0.20.0/kind-linux-amd64
chmod +x ./kind
sudo mv ./kind /usr/local/bin/kind
```

##### Kubernetes + Containerd + Crun

> 

Author: Here is a note to ask the user to follow the instructions in the previous section to install crun with Wasm support: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/blob/b2ecd7fbe57fd9d5398244c899faeb4f69ace7fd/content/en/blog/_posts/2023-12-07-a-demo-of-webassembly-and-wasi-on-kubernetes/index.md?plain=1#L692

In this section, I will demonstrate the manual installation of crun with the WasmEdge runtime library, and adjust containerd config to use crun as the runtime, enabling Wasm support on the Kubernetes node.

Create a single-node Kubernetes cluster using kind.

```bash
kind create cluster --name wasm-demo
```

> Each Kubernetes node created by kind is a Docker container, you can enter that node using the `docker exec` command.

Author: Updated: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/1c7e53b2bd14cde40ce7b89e0b8725be9cd27ff8

```bash
docker exec -it wasm-demo-control-plane bash
```

{{< note >}}
After entering the node, follow the instructions in the section: [Low-level Container Runtime](#low-level-container-runtime) to install crun binary on the node.
{{< /note >}}

Modify the containerd configuration file `/etc/containerd/config.toml`, add the following content at the end:
- Configure `crun` as the runtime handler for containerd. The format is `[plugins."io.containerd.grpc.v1.cri".containerd.runtimes.${HANDLER_NAME}]`.
- `pod_annotations` allows passing the annotation `module.wasm.image/variant` to crun, which is set in Pod metadata to identify the Wasm workload. 

```bash
cat >> /etc/containerd/config.toml << EOF
[plugins."io.containerd.grpc.v1.cri".containerd.runtimes.crun]
    runtime_type = "io.containerd.runc.v2"
    pod_annotations = ["module.wasm.image/variant"]
[plugins."io.containerd.grpc.v1.cri".containerd.runtimes.crun.options]
    BinaryName = "crun"
EOF
```

> Restart containerd.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restart containerd:
```

```bash
systemctl restart containerd
```

> Add label `runtime=crun` on the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the label `runtime=crun` on the node:
```

```bash
kubectl label nodes wasm-demo-control-plane runtime=crun
```

Create a RuntimeClass resource named `crun` to use the pre-configured `crun` handler in containerd, the `scheduling.nodeSelector` property sends pod to nodes with the `runtime=crun` label.

```yaml
apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1
kind: RuntimeClass
metadata:
  name: crun
scheduling:
  nodeSelector:
    runtime: crun
handler: crun
```

Set `.spec.runtimeClassName` for the pod to target the pod at the `crun` RuntimeClass. This will ensure the pod gets assigned to a node and runtime specified in the `crun` RuntimeClass. Additionally, set the annotation `module.wasm.image/variant: compat` to inform crun that this is a Wasm workload.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: wasm-demo-app
  annotations:
    module.wasm.image/variant: compat
spec:
  runtimeClassName: crun
  containers:
  - name: wasm-demo-app
    image: docker.io/cr7258/wasm-demo-app:v1
```

> You can use `port-forward` to forward traffics to your local machine for access.

Reviewer: I'd write:
```suggestion
You can use `kubectl port-forward` to forward traffic from your local machine into the Kubernetes cluster:
```

```bash
kubectl port-forward pod/wasm-demo-app 8080:8080
```

> Open a new terminal, send a request to the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a new terminal, and send a request to the service (running in the test Pod inside Kubernetes):
```

Author: I have made the service available locally using `kubectl port-forward`, and I can access it through the URL http://localhost:8080. So there is no need to send the request in the test Pod inside Kubernetes?

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080
```

The output is:

```bash
Hello, World!
```

Once the testing is complete, you can destroy the cluster using this command.

```bash
kind delete cluster --name wasm-demo
```

> ##### KWasm Operator

Reviewer: This could be:
```markdown
##### Set up the KWasm Operator
```
or
```suggestion
##### Set up your cluster for Wasm using KWasm, then run the app inside a pod
```

{{< figure src="05-kwasm-operator.svg" alt="The diagram illustrates that when Kwasm Operator detects the annotation kwasm.sh/kwasm-node=true on a Kubernetes node, it will create a Job to enable Wasm support on that node." caption="Figure 5: Kwasm Operator" >}}

Create a single-node Kubernetes cluster using kind.

```bash
kind create cluster --name kwasm-demo
```

A Helm chart is available to easily install the Kwasm operator. Install the Kwasm Operator using helm and enable Wasm support for the node `kwasm-demo-control-plane` by adding the annotation `kwasm.sh/kwasm-node=true`.

```bash
# Add HELM repository if not already done
helm repo add kwasm http://kwasm.sh/kwasm-operator/
# Install KWasm operator
helm install -n kwasm --create-namespace kwasm-operator kwasm/kwasm-operator
# Provision Nodes
kubectl annotate node kwasm-demo-control-plane kwasm.sh/kwasm-node=true
```

Add label `runtime=crun` on the node.

```bash
kubectl label nodes kwasm-demo-control-plane runtime=crun

> ```

Author: Use `crun-kwasm`: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/b2ecd7fbe57fd9d5398244c899faeb4f69ace7fd

Create a RuntimeClass resource named `crun` to use the crun handler automatically set up by Kwasm in containerd, the `scheduling.nodeSelector` property sends pod to nodes with the `runtime=crun` label.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example manifest:

```

```yaml
apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1
kind: RuntimeClass
metadata:
  name: crun
scheduling:
  nodeSelector:
    runtime: crun
handler: crun
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

##### Run the WebAssembly app via Kubernetes

Next, run the Wasm app inside a Kubernetes pod.
```
?

Author: I don't add this new header. I changed the header and divided running wasm on kubernetes into manual and automatic using Kwasm.

<img width="340" alt="image" src="https://github.com/kubernetes/website/assets/40051120/7296bfe0-de61-42ca-9732-f834a73e74d5">

Set `.spec.runtimeClassName` for the pod to target the pod at the `crun` RuntimeClass. This will ensure the pod gets assigned to a node and runtime specified in the `crun` RuntimeClass. Additionally, set the annotation `module.wasm.image/variant: compat` to inform crun that this is a Wasm workload.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: wasm-demo-app
  annotations:
    module.wasm.image/variant: compat
spec:
  runtimeClassName: crun
  containers:
  - name: wasm-demo-app
    image: docker.io/cr7258/wasm-demo-app:v1
```

You can use `port-forward` to forward traffics to your local machine for access.

```bash
kubectl port-forward pod/wasm-demo-app 8080:8080
```

> Open a new terminal, send a request to the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Send a request to the service running in the test Pod inside Kubernetes:
```

Author: I have made the service available locally using `kubectl port-forward`, and I can access it through the URL http://localhost:8080. So there is no need to send the request in the test Pod inside Kubernetes?

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080
```

The output is:

```bash
Hello, World!
```

Once the testing is complete, you can destroy the cluster using this command.

```bash
kind delete cluster --name kwasm-demo
```

> In this article, the `module.wasm.image/variant: compat` annotation is used to indicate to the container runtime that the workload is a Wasm workload. In this [PR](https://github.com/containers/crun/pull/886), crun has introduced a new annotation: `module.wasm.image/variant: compat-smart`. 

Reviewer: Although https://github.com/containers/crun/pull/886 calls it an annotation, I think the technically correct name is “label”. When it's set on a container it's a label.

When the `compat-smart` annotation is used, crun can intelligently determine how to start the container based on whether it is a Wasm workload or an OCI container. That makes it possible to run WASM containers with sidecars. Here is an example of a Pod YAML file with a Wasm container and a Linux container:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: wasm-demo-app
  annotations:

>     module.wasm.image/variant: compat-smart

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/a1174d88560edf4b5dc379fd22d8824d4f3d5320

Create a single-node Kubernetes cluster using kind.

```bash
kind create cluster --name kwasm-demo
```

A Helm chart is available to easily install the Kwasm operator. Install the Kwasm Operator using helm and enable Wasm support for the node `kwasm-demo-control-plane` by adding the annotation `kwasm.sh/kwasm-node=true`.

```bash
# Add Helm repository if not already done
helm repo add kwasm http://kwasm.sh/kwasm-operator/
# Install KWasm operator
helm install -n kwasm --create-namespace kwasm-operator kwasm/kwasm-operator
# Provision Nodes
kubectl annotate node kwasm-demo-control-plane kwasm.sh/kwasm-node=true
```

Add label `runtime=crun-kwasm` on the node.

```bash
kubectl label nodes kwasm-demo-control-plane runtime=crun-kwasm
```

Create a RuntimeClass resource named `crun` to use the crun handler automatically set up by Kwasm in containerd, the `scheduling.nodeSelector` property sends pod to nodes with the `runtime=crun-kwasm` label. Here is an example manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1
kind: RuntimeClass
metadata:
  name: crun
scheduling:
  nodeSelector:
    runtime: crun-kwasm
handler: crun

> ```

Reviewer 2: @cr7258, @sftim, IMPORTANT NOTE:
KWasm by default uses the latest [https://github.com/KWasm/kwasm-node-installer](kwasm-node-installer) image built from the `main' branch. Which at the time of writing is > 0.3.0 

> [!CAUTION]
> KWasm Node Installer version v0.3.0 has removed crun in favor of the WasmEdge shim.

There are now two options:

1. Use the v0.2.0 version of the installer.
2. Change the RuntimeClass to `wasmedge`.

## Using the v0.2.0 installer image
```
helm upgrade --install -n kwasm --create-namespace kwasm-operator kwasm/kwasm-operator \
  --set kwasmOperator.autoProvision="true" \
  --set kwasmOperator.installerImage="ghcr.io/kwasm/kwasm-node-installer:v0.2.0"
```

## Changing the RuntimeClass
The `wasmedge` shim behaves like `crun+wasmedge`, but it doesn't need the `compat/compat-smart` annotation. It always uses the Linux container as a fallback. All images that work with `crun+wasmedge` should also work with the shim.

```yaml
apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1
kind: RuntimeClass
metadata:
  name: wasmedge
handler: wasmedge
```

## Reasoning
Maintaining the installation of different runtimes on different Linux and Kubernetes distributions is a complex task. KWasm will be redesigned to better address the requirement to install as many runtimes as possible, but at this stage only runwasi-based shims will be shipped because they have the simplest installation, while most wasm runtimes are available as runwasi shims.

Author: @0xE282B0 Thanks for your reminder. I update content related to KWasm. https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43760/commits/a2cbd9575a0dd6738ae400bc19becc0a63085146
